.TH "spmfilter.conf" "5" "03 Jan 2013" "" ""

.SH "NAME"
.P
spmfilter.conf - configuration file for spmfilter
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.P
spmfilter.conf

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.P
The \fBspmfilter.conf\fR file is the runtime configuration file for 
\fBspmfilter\fR(1).
.P
The \fBspmfilter.conf\fR file controls available modules, logging, header
checking and delivery options.

.SH "FILE FORMAT"
.P
The file consists of modules and parameters. A module begins with the
name of the module in square brackets and continues until the next
module begins. Modules contain parameters of the form \(lqname = value\(rq.
.P
The file is line-based \(em that is, each newline-terminated line represents
either a comment, a module name or a parameter.
.P
Only the first equals sign in a parameter is significant. Whitespace before
or after the first equals sign is discarded. Leading, trailing and internal
whitespace in module and parameter names is irrelevant. Leading and
trailing whitespace in a parameter value is discarded. Internal whitespace
within a parameter value is retained verbatim.
.P
Any line beginning with a hash (#) is ignored, as are lines containing
only whitespace.
.P
The values following the equals sign in parameters are all either a string
(no quotes needed) or a boolean, which may be given as true/false. Case is 
not significant in boolean values, but is preserved in string values.

.SH "SECTIONS"
.SS "The [global] section"
.P
Parameters in this section are global and do not affect any modules.

.IP "\fBengine \fR" 
The "engine" option allows you to specify the spmfilter engine. It's
possible to switch the engine for receiving mails. There are two engines
in spmfilter for receiving emails:

.nf
\fBsmtpd\fR - This engine allows to inject emails via smtp to
spmfilter. But please note, with this engine, spmfilter has to be
started with inetd, Postfix or similar TCP server programs.

\fBpipe\fR - The pipe engine lets you inject emails via shell
pipe to spmfilter. This is usefully, when you don't need a full
smtp server.
.fi

.IP "\fBdebug\fR" 
Enables verbose debugging output. Debugging output will be written to
the configured syslog facility.

.nf
\fBtrue\fR - debugging enabled

\fBfalse\fR - debugging disabled (default)
.fi

.IP "\fBmodules\fR"
Specifies the modules, which will be loaded at runtime. All modules
will be process in the same order, as listed. Module names have to
be separated by a semicolon.

.IP "\fBmodule_fail\fR"
If one module fails, the behaviour of spmfilter can be configured. 
Possible values are:

.nf
1 = proceed and ignore
2 = cancel further processing and return permanet error
3 = cancel further processing and return temporary error (default)
.fi

.IP "\fBnexthop\fR"
This parameter specifies the final destination, after a mail is processed
by spmfilter. The value can be a hostname or IP address, with a port number,
e.g. localhost:2525 to send filtered mails to localhost at port 2525.

.IP "\fBqueue_dir\fR"
Path to queue directory

.IP "\fBbackend\fR"
Define lookup backend, this can be either \fBsql\fR or \fBldap\fR. Every
backend has it's own config section, \fB[sql]\fR and \fB[ldap]\fR.

.IP "\fBbackend_connection\fR"
If there are multiple server configured in the specified backend, it's
possible to define a failover or load-balancing behaviour. Possible 
values are:

.nf
balance	=	when you configure the backend profile for load 
			balancing, spmfilter distributes connections across
			the list of hosts. If the actual host is not reachable,
			spmfilter switches back to failover configuration.
.fi


.nf
failover	=	when you configure the backend profile for 
			failover, spmfilter fails over to the next host in
			the list if it cannot connect to the first host.
.fi

.IP "\fBadd_header\fR"
If true, spmfilter will add a header with the processed modules.

.IP "\fBmax_size\fR"
The maximal size in bytes of a message

.IP "\fBtls_enable\fR
Enable TLS for client connections. If set to 2 the protocol will quit rather
than transferring any messages if the STARTTLS extension is not available.

.nf
0 = disable starttls
1 = use STARTTLS, if available (default)
2 = require STARTTLS
.fi

.IP "\fBpid_file\fR"
The pid_file option sets the file to which the daemon records the process id.

.IP "\fBbind_ip\fR"
The IP addresses the daemon will bind to

.IP "\fBbind_port\fR"
Port to bind to

.IP "\fBmax_childs\fR"
Maximum number of child processes allowed

.IP "\fBspare_childs\fR"
Unused children to always have availale

.IP "\fBlisten_backlog\fR"
The maximum length of the queue of pending connections

.IP "\fBuser\fR"
Drop root privs and switch to the specified user

.IP "\fBgroup\fR"
Drop root privs and switch to the specified group

.SS "The [smtpd] section"
.P
Parameters in this section affect the smtpd engine and smtp delivery.

.IP "\fBnexthop_fail_code\fR"
If the delivery to the final destination fails for any reason, this code is 
used as response to the sending MTA (default 451).

.IP "\fBnexthop_fail_msg\fR"
If the delivery to the final destination fails for any reason, this message 
is used as reponse for the sending MTA.
(default "Requested action aborted: local error in processing").

.P
If you ever need to define SMTP response messages for other error codes, such as 500, than it's possible to configure
these in the smtpd section. The following example will configure spmfilter to send the message "Customized error message" 
with a 500 error code:

.nf
[smtpd]
500=Customized error message.
.fi

.SS "The [sql] section"
Parameters in this section affect the \fBsql backend\fR configuration.

.IP "\fBdriver\fR"
SQL database driver. Supported drivers are mysql, pgsql, sqlite.

.IP "\fBhost\fR"
List of available database hosts, separated by a semicolon. Set to localhost if database is on the same 
host as spmfilter.

.IP "\fBport\fR"
TCP/IP port of database host, if the database is running on a non-standard port.

.IP "\fBname\fR"
Database name, or path to database if driver is set to sqlite.

.IP "\fBuser\fR"
Database username.

.IP "\fBpass\fR"
Database password.

.IP "\fBencoding\fR"
Encoding to match database/table encoding, e.g., latin1, utf8

.IP "\fBmax_connections\fR"
Maximum number of connections to database server

.IP "\fBuser_query\fR"
user_query setting contains the sql query to look up user information in your sql database. 

This parameter supports the following '%' expansions:
.nf
%s = replaced by the full email address.
.fi

.nf
%u = replaced by the local part of the email address.
.fi

.nf
%d = replaced by the domain part of the email address.
.fi

.SS "The [ldap] section"
Parameters in this section affect the \fBldap backend\fR configuration.

.IP "\fBhost\fR"
List of available LDAP hosts, separated by a semicolon. Set to localhost if LDAP server
is on the same host as spmfilter.

.IP "\fBport\fR"
LDAP Port

.IP "\fBbinddn\fR"
Bind DN of LDAP user

.IP "\fBbindpw\fR"
Password of LDAP user

.IP "\fBbase\fR"
Base DN (distinguishing name) for the LDAP server.

.IP "\fBscope\fR"
LDAP search scope, either subtree, onelevel or base.

.IP "\fBuser_query\fR"
user_query setting contains the ldap query to look up user information in your directory. 

This parameter supports the following '%' expansions:
.nf
%s = replaced by the full email address.
.fi

.nf
%u = replaced by the local part of the email address.
.fi

.nf
%d = replaced by the domain part of the email address.
.fi

.SH "EXAMPLE"
.P
What follows is a sample configuration file:

.nf
[global]
engine = smtpd
debug = false
modules=clamav
module_fail = 3
nexthop = localhost:2525
max_size = 0
tls_enable = 1
backend = sql
backend_connection = balance
bind_ip = 127.0.0.1
bind_port = 10025
spare_childs = 5
max_childs = 15
pid_file = /var/run/spmfilter.pid
user = nobody
group = mail

[sql]
driver = postgresql
host = 192.168.0.1;192.168.0.2
name = maildb
user = mail
pass = password
user_query = SELECT * FROM accounts WHERE email='%s'

[clamav]
host = 127.0.0.1
port = 3310
add_header = true
.fi 

.SH "FILES" 
.P
/etc/spmfilter\&.conf or spmfilter\&.conf
 
.SH "BUGS"
.P
If you believe you have found a bug, please send this information, plus 
information about the machine and OS platform used along with a description 
of the problem to bugs@spmfilter.org

.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.P
spmfilter(1)

.SH "AUTHOR(s)" 
.P
spmfilter was written by Axel Steiner <ast@treibsand.com>

